The Joe Rogan experience. So, so one of the things that, that were, uh,
key on because, uh,
our fertility program is carbon and that's what feeds the soil carbon, right?
Not 10 tint and chemical fertilizer, carbon.
And so that aren't use fertilizers at all. No, no, we don't. We don't.
So just manure and,
but we have a big industrial chipper.
You'd love this machine. I mean, it's the ultimate, you know, boy toy,
it's 120 horsepower diesel engine that can,
that can chip 19 inch.
You can take a 40 foot tree and just Huck it in there. And it just wore,
you know, just chips that he knows online. All right. Well, I mean, they're,
they're like the coolest machine that scares the out of me. All right. So, so,
but, but that's the Fargo that that's our fertilizer factory.
Okay. So carbon. So,
so we integrate forest with open land and,
and we integrate the carbon, uh, from the forest.
So we cut junk trees, dead trees, crooked trees, weak trees,
and thin the forest.
And that enables the good trees,
the healthy trees to grow more vigorously, better reduces fire,
uh, potential because you're, you know, you're thinning it out,
taking out all the dead stuff.
And that then becomes our carbon base for bedding the
animals for, you know, and for all the composting that we do. And we do,
you know, mountains and mountains of compost,
where I'm going with this is when we talk about costs
right now, how much has our country spending fighting wildfires?
And how much are we losing fighting all these? I mean, we're in California,
right? I mean, look at the, the devastation that fires have caused. Imagine,
imagine if those,
if we had thousands of
people with chippers,
thinning the forest,
turning them into almost park-like like they were before the Europeans came,
the native Americans kept them going with, you know, with fire, but there were,
there was megafauna here, megafauna. And so we graze through,
we convert a lot of it into, you know,
silvopasture widely spaced trees that are growing unimpeded, uh, with,
with grazing animals underneath so that there's no fire damage.
There's no buildup of fuel.
And suddenly we're producing our own food.
And we're eliminating the danger of wildfire with technology called chainsaws
and chippers. And that carbon becomes the fertility for the vineyards and the,
and the, the agricultural lands. It feeds the soil.
So now we have earthworms instead of hard soil.
We don't have erosion because our organic matter is up on our farm.
Using these principles we've gone in,
we've gone from 1% organic matter to over 8% organic
matter in the soil.
And every 1% holds another 20,000 gallons of water per acre.
Whoa. So, so if we,
so if w so,
and our 60 years of being there in the shadow at Polyface, um,
we have gone from 1% to eight, over 8%. Let's just say that's seven clicks.
Seven times 20 is 140,000 gallons of water per acre.
Now that we can hold that we couldn't hold before.
And it's because of the grazing,
the perennials and the composting,
that's building up the organic matter in the soil that could be done in
California. When you start talking about holding water,
it's not just about how much rainfall are we getting it's how much are we
actually holding in the sponge, uh, to reduce, you know, flooding and runoff.
But things like that.
So it sounds like your method could keep from the situation they
find with some farms of the roading, top soil,
where they have to constantly supplement, but how would you,
how do you grow enough corn? Like,
if you want to have like those monocrop agricultural fields where you see
hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of acres of corn, just corn,
or just soy beans, or just alfalfa, whatever it is like,
if you want to do those monocrop things, you,
how are you going to re fertilize the soil in the same manner with that?
You don't have.
A scale.
You don't have them, you don't have those tomorrow.
Agriculture there's solutions. There's um, uh, now corn,
corn is an amazing plant. So our soybeans, so I'm not all I'm saying,
is that right now, our corn crop, uh, in, in the U S what is it?
30% goes to, goes to alcohol for fuel. Well,
that takes more energy than the, uh, than the fuel we get.
So ethanol ethanol.
We don't need.
That.
Ethanol is a by-product of what we use to think that we needed ethanol.
We've run out of gas. Right, right. So,
so that's not, uh, that's not necessary. Okay.
So that fracking.
Yeah. So, so w w so that's not good either though.
No. So w we don't need, we don't need to grow that corn. Well, you know, um, uh,
you know, come on electric vehicles and, and that, I mean, that's all,
that's changing the landscape a lot, but.
It isn't a lot of it for agriculture.
Well, yeah. So, so, so, so then the next is to feed, to feed cattle.
So another huge percentage, like 20% goes to feed cattle,
and then another huge percent goes to hogs and chickens, of course, but the,
one of the problems with the hogs and chickens is that they are not integrated
with the food system. So right now, right now,
I'm 50, almost 50%. It's arguable.
You know who, what statistician, again, figures, lie and liars figure.
But somewhere between 40 and 50% of human edible food
on the planet is never eaten by a human it spoils it's thrown
away.
And 75% of everything that goes into landfills is biodegradable.
So when you start matching up the waste, the waste streams and the loss,
the losses in our food system and our waste streams,
what happens is very quickly, you start seeing that it's the segregated,
it's this, it's this single species, single crop,
single segregated notion where,
where it's not related, it's not symbiotic.
It's not synergistic that actually creates the problem.
A city in Belgium. This was,
this was articulated in pat foreman's wonderful book. The title is city chicks.
And she talks, she's talking about urban chickens.
The city in Belgium offered three chickens per household to
anybody that wanted a chicken.
And they had 2000 families raise their hands, says, yeah,
we'll take three chickens.
So they got 6,000 chickens distributed them through this, to the city.
And in the first month it dropped a hundred tons of food
waste to the landfill. What,
and so not only did they eliminate the, the landfill waste,
all these people now suddenly had chickens,
and Pat's done all the math on this and shows that if one in three households
had enough chickens to eat your kitchen scraps, there would not be a,
there would not be an egg industry in the United States.
It would be completely non-essential really.
So that's the power of integration.
That's the power of, of, of proximate,
of actual putting stuff close, you know?
So there wasn't a generic industry because everyone would be growing.
Everybody had their own eggs. Wow. Yeah, yeah.
And the landfills that landfill would get way, way less material.
And so, so then, so then the chickens don't need the corn from the corn fields.
So the fields can be turned back into Prairie to feed herbivores,
which now would be cows, not bison, but that's our,
that's our earth before of, of value.
And so now you're at perennials instead of annuals and perennials,
instead of annuals, perennials put energy in the soil,
annuals extract energy from the soil.
So now suddenly you're producing you're instead of producing
an annual fertilized with petroleum
to feed beef for somebody else. Instead,
you're not growing the corn, you don't need the tractor,
you don't need the petroleum, the cows fertilize it themselves.
And the perennial builds a soil like it did with the bison.
And you have the beef instead of coming out on feed lot,
it's coming off the Prairie like the bison did,
and suddenly you're building soils that are losing soil and your production
doesn't change one iota.
It doesn't take any more land to produce the beef with what I've described
than what it does with corn. It doesn't take any more land.
Okay. So you're, you're,
you're essentially saying that they have to convert to not just growing corn.
That's right. They're going to have to do a.
Right that's right. Corn, corn is, I mean,
that kind of monocrop mano speciated thing is,
is a complete, I mean,
we S we started the interview talking about standing on nature on her neck,
you know, that is, uh,
a quintessential example of standing on nature's
neck. And, um, you know,
the reason our farm was so deteriorated when we came to it was because we're in,
we're in Virginia Shenandoah valley. And, um, you know,
that was the bread basket of the Confederacy during the civil war,
if you know your history. And, um, and,
and essentially the war was finally one when,
when they burned all the crops in the Shenandoah valley. And, and,
and during that time,
the valley lost somewhere between three and five feet of soil
during that, that time period. So the soils are worn out,
and then we got the westward expansion and it all moved to Ohio and Indiana.
And then finally the Dakotas and, you know, kept heading west. So this,
this head west head west young man head west was partly because our agriculture
destroyed the soils. And if we don't,
if we don't start using our agriculture to build soils,
we have a lot more to worry about than, uh, than a, than a COVID-19 deal.
A lot more to worry about.
If we don't figure out a way to produce food abundantly and grow soil while
we're doing it,
the pandemic is going to be the least of our concerns.